## Code book: Getting and cleaning data course project
This code book briefly describes the raw data, transformations performed to clean the data, and the variables of the tidy(clean) data set 

### The raw Data 
The raw data has 10299 observations and 563 variables. It contains the results from experiments carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope,  the 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz were captured. '-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain.

### Data transformations
1. The raw data set generated by merging two datasets to create a single data set
2. Only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement were extracted from the raw data set to give a data frame with 10299 observations and 88 variables.
3. These variables were the  appropriately labeled with descriptive variable names.
4. A second independent tidy data set was created with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

### The tidy data
The tidy data is a data frame with 180 observations and 88 variables.

* Note
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals(tri-axial signals) in the X, Y and Z directions.

### The variables
1
subject
The identification numbers of the study participants.

2
activity
The type of the activity that was performed by each study participant.

3, 4, and 5
timebodyaccelerometer.mean...X, timebodyaccelerometer.mean...Y, and timebodyaccelerometer.mean...Z respectively. The mean values of the body accelarations signals that were captured by the accelerometer.

6, 7, and 8
timegravityaccelerometer.mean...X, timegravityaccelerometer.mean...Y, and timegravityaccelerometer.mean...Z respectively. The mean values of the gravity acceleration signals that were captured by the accelerometer.

9, 10, and 11
timebodyaccelerometerJerk.mean...X, timebodyaccelerometerJerk.mean...Y, and timebodyaccelerometerJerk.mean...Z respectively. The mean values of the jerk signals that were drived from calculating the body linear acceleration in time.

12, 13, and 14
timebodygyroscope.mean...X, timebodygyroscope.mean...Y, and timebodygyroscope.mean...Z respectively. The mean values of the body angular velocity signals that were captured by the gyroscope.

15, 16, and 17
timebodygyroscopeJerk.mean...X, timebodygyroscopeJerk.mean...Y, and timebodygyroscopeJerk.mean...Z respectively.The mean values of the jerk signals that were drived from calculating the body angular velocity in time.

18
timebodyaccelerometermagnitude.mean. The mean values of the magnitude of the body acceleration signals that were calculated using the Euclidean norm. 

19
timegravityaccelerometermagnitude.mean. The mean values of the magnitude of the gravity acceleration signals that were calculated using the Euclidean norm.

20
timebodyaccelerometerJerkmagnitude.mean. The mean values of the magnitude of the jerk signals of the body linear acceleration that were calculated using the Euclidean norm.  

21
timebodygyroscopemagnitude.mean. The mean values of the magnitude of the body angular velocity signals that were calculated using the Euclidean norm.

22
timebodygyroscopeJerkmagnitude.mean. The mean values of the magnitude of the jerk signals of the body angular velocity that were calculated using the Euclidean norm.   

23, 24, and 25
frequencybodyaccelerometer.mean...X, frequencybodyaccelerometer.mean...Y, and frequencybodyaccelerometer.mean...Z respectively. The mean values of the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the body linear accleration results obtained from the accelerometer.

26, 27, and 28
frequencybodyaccelerometer.meanFreq...X, frequencybodyaccelerometer.meanFreq...Y, and frequencybodyaccelerometer respectively.meanFreq...Z. The mean values of the means of the frequencies of the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the body linear accleration results obtained from the accelerometer. 

29, 30, and 31
frequencybodyaccelerometerJerk.mean...X, frequencybodyaccelerometerJerk.mean...Y, and frequencybodyaccelerometerJerk respectively.mean...Z. The mean values of the jerk signals obtained from the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the body linear accleration results obtained from the accelerometer.

32, 33, and 34
frequencybodyaccelerometerJerk.meanFreq...X, frequencybodyaccelerometerJerk.meanFreq...Y, and frequencybodyaccelerometerJerk.meanFreq...Z respectively. The mean values of the means of the frequencies of the jerk signals obtained from the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the body linear accleration results obtained from the accelerometer.

35, 36, and 37
frequencybodygyroscope.mean...X, frequencybodygyroscope.mean...Y, and frequencybodygyroscope.mean...Z respectively. The mean values of the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the angular velocity results obtained from the gyroscope.  

38, 39, and 40
frequencybodygyroscope.meanFreq...X, frequencybodygyroscope.meanFreq...Y, and frequencybodygyroscope.meanFreq...Z respectively. The mean values of the means of the frequencies of the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the angular velocity results obtained from the gyroscope.

41
frequencybodyaccelerometermagnitude.mean. The mean values of the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the magnitude of the body linear acceleration signals that were calculated using the Euclidean norm. 

42
frequencybodyaccelerometermagnitude.meanFreq. The mean values of the means of the frequencies of the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the magnitude of the body linear accleration results obtained from the accelerometer. 

43
frequencybodyaccelerometerJerkmagnitude.mean. The mean values of the jerk signals that are the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the magnitude of the body linear acceleration that were calculated using the Euclidean norm.

44 
frequencybodyaccelerometerJerkmagnitude.meanFreq.The mean values of the means of the frequencies of the jerk signals that are result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the magnitude of the body linear accleration results obtained from the accelerometer

45
frequencybodygyroscopemagnitude.mean. the mean values of the result of a Fast Fourire Transform that was conducted on the magnitude of the body angular velocity signals that were calculated using the Euclidean norm.

46
frequencybodygyroscopemagnitude.meanFreq. The mean values of the means of the frequencies of the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the magnitude of the angular velocity results obtained from the acceleromete

47
frequencybodygyroscopeJerkmagnitude.mean. The mean values of the means of the frequencies of the jerk signals that are result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the magnitude of the angular velocity results obtained from the accelerometer

48
frequencybodygyroscopeJerkmagnitude.meanFreq.The mean values of the means of the frequencies of the jerk signals that are result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the magnitude of the angular velocity results obtained from the accelerometer

49
angle.timebodyaccelerometermean.gravity.The mean values of the gravity acceleration signals that were captured by the accelerometer in a signal window sample

50
angle.timebodyaccelerometerJerkmean..gravitymean.The mean values of the jerk signals obtained from the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the body linear accleration results obtained from the accelerometer in a signal window sample.

51
angle.timebodygyroscopemean.gravitymean.The mean values of the angularvelocity signals that were captured by the gyroscope in a signal window sample

angle.timebodygyroscopeJerkmean.gravitymean.The mean values of the jerk signals obtained from the result of a Fast Fourier Transform that was conducted on the body angular velocity results obtained from the gyroscope in a signal window sample       

52, 53, and 54
angle.X.gravitymean, angle.Y.gravitymean,angle.Z.gravitymean. The mean gravity values in the 3 axial signals in the X,Y and Z direction.

* NOTE
The descriptions of the standard deviations(std) of the remaining 34 variables are the same as those for the means of the variables described above.  
 
    
 
 
  


 